docs: CKB Hard Fork History (#495)
nervosnetwork/docs.nervos.org: website/docs/history-and-hard-forks/ckb-hard-fork-history.mdx

---
id: ckb-hard-fork-history
title: "CKB Hard Fork History"
---

# CKB Hard Fork History

This page contains a timeline of all the hard forks, and updates to the Nervos CKB.

## 2nd Hard Fork – CKB Edition Meepo (2024)

<div
  style={{
    backgroundColor: "var(--surface-03)",
    padding: "1rem 1.5rem",
    borderRadius: "20px",
  }}
>

>   📅 Date: TBD <br />

Reviewer: shall we seprate the date for testnet and mainnet?

  Epoch number: TBD
</div>

### Meepo (2024) Summary

The CKB Edition Meepo (2024) introduces groundbreaking features like the Spawn syscall and `data2` JSON representation, empowering developers to build more complex, efficient dApps while improving data precision.

### Important Features

<details>
  <summary>CKB-VM V2</summary>

    - Added new syscalls Spawn, Get Memory Limit, and Set Content to give developers better control over memory and content management.

>     - Introduced the "A" Standard Extension to support atomic instructions, simplifying development and reducing the need for manual fixes.

Reviewer: please remove this, it is not included in this hardfork.

>     - Implemented more macro-op fusions to reduce cycle consumption, making Scripts run more efficiently.

Reviewer: can you help confirm this? @XuJiandong

Reviewer 2: The first one should be updated:
```
One notable addition is the inclusion of a new system call called "Spawn," which can be further explored in the RFC titled "VM Syscalls 3." In essence, Spawn serves as an alternative to dynamic library calls and Exec. With Spawn, a script can create a child script with an independent memory area, and data can be passed between the parent and child scripts without restriction.
```
Please refine it before adding it.

```
    - Introduced the "A" Standard Extension to support atomic instructions, simplifying development and reducing the need for manual fixes.
```
Remove it. The A extension is not included.

>     - Used the `hash_type` field to smoothly manage different VM versions, ensuring a seamless upgrade path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Add a new `data2` value in the Script `hash_type` field to smoothly manage different VM versions, ensuring a seamless upgrade path.
```

In CKB-VM, a process represents the active execution of a RISC-V binary, which can reside within a Cell or be included in the `witness` during a Spawn syscall. The Spawn syscall enables a parent process to initiate a child process that executes a different program or command independently. Notably, the parent process remains unblocked during the child process's execution, allowing for concurrent operations.

This functionality is particularly beneficial for developers aiming to build complex dependencies and sophisticated Script libraries. By leveraging the Spawn syscall, Scripts can execute other Scripts or programs within the same execution context, promoting modularity and reuse in dApps on the CKB platform. This advancement enhances the flexibility and scalability of dApp development, enabling more intricate and efficient contract interactions.

</details>

### Tools & Upgrade Requirements

Coming soon...

### Resources

- [CKB2023](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0051-ckb2023/0051-ckb2023.md)

> - [RFC48](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0048-remove-block-header-version-reservation-rule/0048-remove-block-header-version-reservation-rule.md): Remove Block Header Version Reservation Rule

Reviewer: is this included in the Meepo hardfork? @zhangsoledad

Reviewer 3: yes，included.
